The Tutinama or, the Tales of the Parrot, is a collection of short tales with moral lessons focused
towards the lonely protagonist Khojisteh. The manuscript was commissioned by the Mughal King Akbar
in the 16th century, as he was greatly interested in literature and the arts. Akbar’s love for all
things art expanded the artistic style of the time to include the art of Islamic, Persian, Central
Asian, and Indigenous Indian cultures. Early examples of this overlapping is observable in the
Tutinama. Various artists from different cultural backgrounds were hired to create the beautiful
illustrations that accompanied the tales, each bringing a unique style to the manuscript. These
illustrated stories are told from the perspective of a wise parrot, who attempts to prevent
Khojisteh from being unfaithful with her lover while her husband is away. In the Twentieth Tale of
the Tuti-Nama titled “The Woman who by a Stratagem escaped out of the Lion's clutches” we see the
parrot tell a tale to Khojisteh of a woman who uses wit to outmaneuver a dangerous leopard.
The translation of the original text has lead to some discrepancies such as referring to the animal in
the story as a “lion” when in fact the animal is illustrated as a leopard. The story begins with
the setting of the sun, and the rise of the moon when Khojisteh yet again plans to meet her lover.
Before she leaves, she asks the parrot for permission to go, and to give it to her quickly so she
won’t miss her opportunity to see her lover again. In response the parrot claims that Khojisteh is
wise and does not need to seek his permission or guidance. Yet, the parrot tells her that if she is
to run into trouble while on her adventure to put into practice wit like the woman who escaped the leopard.
Intrigued, Khojisteh asks “what kind of story is that?” again getting distracted by the
parrot’s tales. The parrot begins the tale of a woman who flees her home with her two small
children after being physically abused by her husband. They safely flee into a forest filled with
animated and alluring foliage and colours, until they encounter a fierce leopard. The threat of the
wild cats hunger is seen in its sinister eyes, long tongue, and sharp teeth. Frightened, the woman
thinks to herself that if she and her children escape the clutches of the leopard without harm then
she will “return home and be obedient to [her husband]”. Thinking on her feet, she materializes a
story in hopes that it will protect her children and herself. With confidence, she entices the
leopard to listen to her words. She exclaims that in these woods there roams a mighty beast that
every man and animal fears. Everyday, the king will send subjects into the forest to be devoured by
the beast, and today is her and her children’s turn. The woman continues by offering her children
to the leopard in exchange for her freedom, claiming that she will be unburdened and able to
escape. The leopard, only being occupied by two small infants will also have the opportunity to
escape before the beast arrives. The leopard responds, claiming that since he has nowhere to escape
to, there is no point in devouring her children, and leaves them unharmed. Her plan having worked,
the mother is able to escape and goes back to her husband.
Having completed his story, the parrot tells Khojisteh to now go to her lover. However, as
Khojisteh makes to leave, the cock crows signalling the rise of the sun and end of the night, again
deterring Khojisteh’s plan to meet her lover. The story the parrot tells works not only as a
distraction to Khojisteh, but also provides a moral lesson. The woman in the story runs away from
her husband, but upon coming into danger, promises to remain faithful if she is able to escape.
The parrot, as a means of discouraging Khojisteh from being unfaithful, uses this to remind her to
remain loyal to her husband.